Dilyn Corner

Extra Credit – Philosophy Conference 


The Spinoza talk was an interesting one. I hadn’t studied Spinoza in well over a year (I took the Early Modern Seminar with Professor Grey last year), so it was refreshing to move to something different from Greek philosophy that I’ve been learning about all year. His thesis was something that seems quite contested: for Spinoza, what is ‘good’ (or ‘evil’) is an objective fact, but not a normative claim about the object it’s being said of. It depends not on the beliefs that a person has (like subjective statements would) but how it impacts their nature. For Spinoza, this would mean their innate striving for preservation and thriving. Things are regarded as ‘good’ or ‘evil’ insofar as they contribute positively or negatively to that individual’s power to act. So, for example, withered trees are bad because their nature disagrees with what we would believe to be the true nature of a tree. Our personal ideas of what a thing should be determine our evaluations of perfection and imperfection; our evaluations of good and evil. Aesthetic claims and sensory claims we make are related to each other by this idea, but these claims are not rooted in some intrinsic thing in the object itself – good and evil are not in the object, but are instead understood as a relation between people and the objects. 

The Q&A had some interesting questions asked. One of them was whether or not a truly free individual could exist in principle. Nadler believes that the free individual isn’t something that we as people asymptotically approach over time, but rather that at some point in time, given enough of it, someone will make it to that point. It’s conceivable, at least, that someone could become totally free. I myself had a question unrelated to this idea, but it was quite interesting to hear this understanding of Spinoza – when I was reading through the Ethics, this was not the conclusion that I came to; the completely free man seemed an impossible, idealistic conclusion one could draw, but not a principled one. 

My question was related to Spinoza’s theory of mind: to every body there is a corresponding idea. So it seems to be the case that, if we have an idea of good (or evil) with respect to an object, that idea might correspond to some particular thing in the object itself. Or, taken even more strictly, our idea of good relates to this thing in the object that is the physical version of ‘good’ for that thing. Nadler’s response was that it isn’t necessary that this idea be correlated with something in the body the idea is about: instead, the idea can be in correspondence with something like our physical state while having that idea. Nadler used the idea of a unicorn. I take issue with this argument simply for the following reason: assume that unicorns do not exist. If this is the case, then the idea I have of a unicorn is solely in my ‘mind’. This idea is composed of two separate ideas which I have. One of these ideas is the idea corresponding to a horn, the other a horse. I have composed these two ideas into a single one, that being a unicorn. Now, these two ideas that I compose come from objects I have seen, interacted with, have knowledge of, etc. So these ideas, while corresponding to perhaps a particular physical state I have whilst thinking of them, correspond to real objects in the world. Would it not be the case then, perhaps, that my idea of the good of an object, while corresponding to a physical state that I have, that this physical state would correspond to something in that object i.e., the good in that object? While I like his reading of Spinoza, I find it hard to get by this correspondence relationship without a bit more of a robust framework. 


I also went to day 2 of the conference. I sat in on the last half of the talks, all of which were quite interesting. One of the talks was on Kripke’s paper setting out to resolve Wittgenstein’s paradox that we come across in his ''Philosophical Investigations''. This paradox relates to rules and what thing in ourselves grounds our assurance that our rules are the correct rules. Kripke uses the example of quaddition – a new operation, similar to addition, unless one is adding two positive integers where one is greater than 56. She went over several possible ways one could attempt to escape the paradox, but did an excellent job presenting their failures in truly solving the problem. 

Several of the questions which were asked during the Q&A related to something that I think cuts straight to the heart of the matter, and in fact is a point I think Wittgenstein might be somewhat inclined to agree with. A lot of the people responded with ideas that essentially were about how language is a community event: language cannot be considered in isolation, like it is in this paradox, because language is a developed tool through living in a community. Without the proper surroundings, particular advanced language skills necessary to setup the paradox never truly develop. Besides that, considering an individual in isolation seems to be missing the point of what language is for: without other people, language seems ultimately useless as a tool for communicating (which would seem to be its primary purpose). Language use is governed by a series of rules – I think the point Wittgenstein tries to raise in this passage of the ''Investigations'' is to demonstrate that these rules are community developed, and thus are meaningful only in the context in which they are used (a particular group, say). 

I spoke with Professor Grey after her talk and asked him what he thought of a possible solution (something related to a point which he raised during the talk, which seemed motivated by our readings in Metaphysics!): addition as formally understood by mathematicians is an operation taken in tandem with a field. A field is a technical, mathematical object which satisfies several properties under any operation you choose to define (it can be a usual one like multiplication or addition, or an arbitrary one like circle and star). So addition is meaningful only with respect to a particular field. Could it not be said that the rule we are using isn’t grounded in us, but instead in our mutual understanding as speakers that the operation being used is the one that is defined for the particular field we’re using – most commonly, the real numbers. We agreed that this seemed to be really what was going on, and while it granted Kripke his point (nothing in the individual grounds the rule itself), it seemed to get around the crux of the problem: that the rule is meaningless. I spoke with the speaker afterwards and she was not convinced by the suggestion, but said that she would consider it in her paper. I take that as a small victory, at the very least. All in all, the conference was very interesting and I can’t wait to attend next year, hopefully with something to present myself! 
